---
layout: post
title: SMT Solvers for CTFs
date: 2024-03-02
description: Writing a Z3 Python script to solve a CTF
tags: ctf
---
### What is SMT?

Satisfiability modulo theories, or **SMT** for short, is the problem of determining whether a particular formula is *satisfiable*. It is a common topic in computer science theory and is a generalization of *Boolean Satisfiability*, or **SAT**, which only handles boolean (True/False) formulas. SMT is widely used in program analysis and verification and is readily available in many popular programming languages ([Z3 Python](https://github.com/Z3Prover/z3)).

SAT is, as far as we know, NP-complete, so SMT is NP-hard. However, researchers have determined a number theories that lead to *decidable* SMT problems and are added directly into the logic of SMT solvers.

### Solvers

SMT *solvers* are automated tools that aid practicioners in solving relevant SMT problems. For example, SMT solvers are often used in *symbolic execution* engines to determine particular useful inputs to a program. Solvers can also be invoked directly for smaller problems, like CTFs which will be demonstrated here.

#### Example SMT

$$ x > 0 \wedge x \leq 5 \wedge x \bmod 3 = 0 $$

Obviously, this example is simple to evaluate - $$ x = 3 $$ - but it goes to show the additional expressiveness of SMT in comparison to SAT. We can expand this example a bit to show that compound expressions can also be used in SMT.

$$ x, y > 0 \wedge x + y \leq 5 \wedge x \bmod 3 = 0 $$

Here, the solver will determine satisfiable values for both $$ x $$ and $$ y $$, returning the set, $$ \{x: 3, y: 2\} $$.

### Z3Py

Z3 is a popular SMT solver/prover developed by [Microsoft](https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/research/project/z3-3/) and is the target of many software engineering and verification tasks. It is avaiable in many mainstream languages and can be installed via their respective package managers. Among them, Python provides a seemless API that enables quick scripting that applies nicely to CTF challenges.

#### Install

```bash
$ pip install z3-solver
```

#### Basic Z3 Example

The examples from above, solved using Z3Py

```python
from z3 import *

x = Int('x') # creating a Z3-aware variable, "x"
solve(x > 0, x <= 5, x % 3 == 0)
```

Running this, we should expect $$ x = 3 $$, as above.

```sh
$ python3 ./z3-example.py
[x = 3]
```
#### Using the solver object

Z3Py also provides a solver object that can be instantiated to manage the constraint environment. Here, multiple constraints can be added incrementally to the solver. We can even check the state of the solver by printing it.

```python
from z3 import *

solver = Solver() # instantiate a solver object

x = Int('x')
y = Int('y')

solver.add(x  > 0, y > 0) # add multiple constraints at once
solver.add(x + y >= 5) # add complex expression as a constraint
solver.add(x % 3 == 0)

print(solver) # get the current state of the solver
```

Running this, we now get the set of constraints specified above.

```sh
$ python3 ./z3-example.py
[x > 0, y > 0, x + y >= 5, x%3 == 0]
```

In some cases, it may not be necessary to know *what* the satisfying values are, just *if* they can be satisfied. The solver allows us to check this using the `check()` method.

```python
...
print(solver.check())
```

```sh
$ python3 ./z3-example.py
sat
```

Now that we know the specified constraints are satisfiable, we can get a *model* of the constraints to retrieve satisfying values for $$ x $$ and $$ y $$.

```python
...
print(solver.model())
```

```sh
$ python3 ./z3-example.py
[x = 3, y = 2]
```

### Example CTF Solution

Sparing the manual binary RE work, I came across a simple CTF challenge that seemed like a good candiate for SMT rather than other techniques (fuzzing, etc.).

The basic overview of the goes as follows:

1. Program takes 17 characters as input from stdin and stores in an array
2. Swap the 12th and 16th index
3. XOR each even index with 0xe0
4. XOR each odd index with 0x3c
5. Sort the array in ascending order
6. Compare the resulting array with a key array, returning the flag if they match

This particular challenge outputs the key array values, but it could also be extracted from further analysis, if necessary.

#### Modeling the arrays

To solve this challenge, we'll need to use the Z3 `BitVec` object in order to perform the bitwise XOR. Note, `BitVec` requires the bit length to be specified. 

List comprehension can be used here instead of instantiating 17 separate `BitVec` variables. Again, the output list was determined from the output of the challenge. We also use an intermediate `xor` list - more on this later. 

```python
from z3 import *

n = 17

inp = [BitVec(f"x_{i}", 32) for i in range(n)]
out = [0x49, 0x4b, 0x4e, 0x4f,  0x55, 0x55, 0x59, 0x5d, 0x82, 0x86, 0x88, 0x8b, 0x8d, 0x93, 0x93, 0x93, 0x96]
xor = []
```

#### Swapping

It's much simpler to swap the input now, before specifying constraints, than deriving some constraint that says input indeces 12 and 16 should be equal to some other indeces after XOR and sort. 

Think how specifying a constraint like this might over-constrain possible solutions to the challenge...

```python
...
solver = Solver()

inp[12], inp[16] = inp[16], inp[12]
```

#### XOR

We can simply iterate over the input list and specify constraints for each index of the output list after the XOR operations. 

Note, that we *must* also constrain the XOR keys since the BitVec constructor doesn't take a literal value parameter. I.e., you can't do something like `BitVec(0xAA)` to create a BitVec that holds the hexadecimal value 0xAA.

Also note that the result of the XOR operation is added to the intermediate `xor` list. This will help us specifiy constraints for sorting.

```python
...
xor_even = BitVec('x_even', 32)
xor_odd = BitVec('x_odd', 32)
# Must constrain the XOR keys
solver.add(xor_even == 0xe0)
solver.add(xor_odd == 0x3c)

xor_result = None
for i in range(n):
	if i % 2 == 0:
		xor_result = inp[i] ^ xor_even
		solver.add(xor_result == out[i])
	else:
		xor_result = inp[i] ^ xor_odd
		solver.add(xor_result == out[i])

	xor.append(xor_result) ## Add result of XOR to xor list
```

#### Sort

Now, we can iterate over the `xor` list, which contains the bitwise XOR operations, and specify that it must be sorted in ascending order.

```python
...
for i in range(n-1):
    solver.add(xor[i] <= xor[i+1])
```

#### Print constraints

While not included in my actual solution, we can check the constraints we've specified as done in the previous example. This demonstrates why using the `Solver` object is preferred when working with complex environments.

```python
print(solver)
```

```bash
$ python3 ./ctf-z3.py
[x_even == 224,
 x_odd == 60,
 x_0 ^ x_even == 73,
 x_1 ^ x_odd == 75,
 x_2 ^ x_even == 78,
 x_3 ^ x_odd == 79,
 x_4 ^ x_even == 85,
 x_5 ^ x_odd == 85,
 x_6 ^ x_even == 89,
...
 x_0 ^ x_even <= x_1 ^ x_odd,
 x_1 ^ x_odd <= x_2 ^ x_even,
 x_2 ^ x_even <= x_3 ^ x_odd,
 x_3 ^ x_odd <= x_4 ^ x_even,
 x_4 ^ x_even <= x_5 ^ x_odd,
 x_5 ^ x_odd <= x_6 ^ x_even,
...]
```

#### Check satisfiability and get solution

Finally, we can check if the constraints we've specified for the challenge can be satisfied. If they are, we can get numeric, human-readable values or use the `sys` library to write their raw byte values to `stdout`.

```python
if solver.check() == sat:
	model = solver.model()
	solution = [model.evaluate(inp[i]).as_long() for i in range(n)]
	solution[12], solution[16] = solution[16], solution[12]
    print(solution) ## Readable solution

    ''' Raw byte solution
	solution = bytes(tmp)
	sys.stdout.buffer.write(solution)
    '''
```

```bash
$ python3 ./ctf-z3.py
[169, 119, 174, 115, 181, 105, 185, 97, 98, 186, 104, 183, 118, 175, 115, 175, 109]
```

### Final Thoughts

SMT is one of those interesting pieces of computer science theory that applies to practical problems in a relatively straightforward way. Tools like Z3 make it easily accessible for quick problems like CTFs, but have also seen recent attention in large projects. 

A few useful resources for more SMT-based work:

[SMT International Workshop](https://smt-workshop.cs.uiowa.edu/2023/)\
[SMT Solvers for Software Security](https://www.usenix.org/system/files/conference/woot12/woot12-final26.pdf)\
[Constraint solving in Symbolic Execution (Angr)](https://docs.angr.io/en/latest/core-concepts/solver.html)
